---
layout: post
title: m4 - The Nifty Macro Processor
category: nifty
author: rocx
---

In the beginning, there was long and complicated code. Then came along 
functions to make repetitive tasks less repetitive. But not everything 
can take advantage of functions. Configurations, run-controls, and 
regular documents seem hopelessly lost. Move over, your now-former best 
friend, because there is a new tool under your belt.

`m4` is more accurately an "old tool", first appearing all the way back in 
1977. Yet another lovechild of UNIX greybeards Brian Kernighan and Dennis 
Ritchie, `m4` provides the user with a way to define new words and what 
they can be substituted with depending on different contexts. In other 
words, it functions as a preprocessor. Beats any idea of a `sed` script 
to replace keywords to a pulp. The second best part besides the fact 
`m4` exists is that if you run a UNIX-like operating system (GNU/Linux, 
Macintosh OS X, and other members of the BSD family), it is already 
installed. Congratulations, you are the proud owner of a macro processor.

If you expected this post to explain how to use `m4`, you will be sorely 
disappointed. But you can always [check the manuals][gnum4].

[gnum4]:	http://www.gnu.org/software/m4/manual/index.html

### Preprocessing

If you deal with code in C (or dare I say C++), you may have noticed 
lines such as `#include "header.h"` or `#define THING 42`. These lines 
are handled by a preprocessor specially tailored for C. Theoretically, 
you could use the C preprocesor for common text files, but that can 
throw it off by a few measures. This is where `m4` shines better than 
`cpp` in many cases.

### Rule of Generation

The [Rule of Generation][taoup] is one of the (sadly) lesser-known rules 
of the famed UNIX philosophy. Long story short, aim for programs that 
create to speed up the development process.

[taoup]: http://catb.org/~esr/writings/taoup/html/generationchapter.html

A common use of `m4` is to create web pages more efficiently. Too many 
people have been turned away from automating hypertext markup generation 
that they *insist* on writing it all by hand. Thank you very much, Adobe 
Dreamweaver, for instilling this fear.

Those people are insane in my book to think that manually writing markup 
is okay. With their new pal `m4`, they can instead specify how to create 
markup to their own whims. Saves time and it can stay in their style. 
Sounds like a win-win deal. At the risk of this next sentence sounding 
like a shameless plug, I even utilized `m4` as my site's backend for 
static blog generation. Even managed to [cram the template][ix] into an 
eighty by twenty-four cell screen.

[ix]:	http://ix.io/jzk

### But That's Not All, Folks

There is a lot more `m4` is capable of than petty text substitution. It 
just takes creativity and tinkering to truly grasp its full potential. 
Further reading can be found at:

* [K&R's 1977 paper][knr]
* [Exploiting the *m4* Macro Language by Kenneth Turner][etm4ml]
* [GNU's m4 manual][gnum4]

[knr]: http://wolfram.schneider.org/bsd/7thEdManVol2/m4/m4.pdf
[etm4ml]: http://www.cs.stir.ac.uk/~kjt/research/pdf/expl-m4.pdf
